Updating v2 guide (#9324)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade/01-upgrading-to-v2.md

---
title: "Upgrading to v2.0"
id: upgrading-to-v2

> description: Install dbt Core v2.0 — the open-source Rust-based foundation that dbt Fusion builds on

Reviewer: This should be the upgrade guide to migrated to v2 - whether you choose Core or Fusion

Author: Going to change this to be consistent with other upgrade guides.

> description: Install dbt Core v2.0 — the open-source Rust-based foundation that dbt Fusion builds on

Author: ```suggestion
description: New features and changes in v2.0
```

dbt Core v2.0 is currently in alpha. This does not affect the Fusion in platform rollout, which continues on its existing track.
:::

> v2.0 marks a new foundation for dbt with a faster, Rust-based runtime rebuilt from the ground up and released in two distributions. [dbt Core v2.0](/docs/local/install-dbt) is the open-source evolution of the trusted data transformation standard. [dbt Fusion](/docs/fusion/about-fusion) extends that foundation and adds SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, instant feedback, and platform-connected workflows. Both distributions share the same project language and DAG semantics, so your existing dbt project works with either.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
v2.0 marks a new foundation for dbt with a faster, Rust-based runtime rebuilt from the ground up and released in two distributions. [dbt Core v2.0](/docs/local/install-dbt) is the open-source evolution of the trusted data transformation standard. [dbt Fusion](/docs/fusion/about-fusion) extends that foundation and adds SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, instant feedback, and platform-connected workflows. Both distributions share the same project language and DAG semantics, so once you've upgraded to v2.0, your existing dbt project works with either.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mentioned Fusion is the best way to start with v2, like:

> v2.0 marks a new foundation for dbt with a faster, Rust-based runtime rebuilt from the ground up and released in two distributions. For most users, the right distribution is [dbt Fusion](/docs/fusion/about-fusion), which extends the OSS core with SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, instant feedback, and platform-connected workflows. For license-aware customers, we offer [dbt Core v2.0](/docs/local/install-dbt), a distribution made up only of Apache 2 OSS code. Both distributions share the same project language and DAG semantics, so once you've upgraded to v2.0, your existing dbt project works with either.

> v2.0 marks a new foundation for dbt with a faster, Rust-based runtime rebuilt from the ground up and released in two distributions. [dbt Core v2.0](/docs/local/install-dbt) is the open-source evolution of the trusted data transformation standard. [dbt Fusion](/docs/fusion/about-fusion) extends that foundation and adds SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, instant feedback, and platform-connected workflows. Both distributions share the same project language and DAG semantics, so once you've upgraded to v2.0, your existing dbt project works with either.

Author: ```suggestion
v2.0 marks a new foundation for dbt: a faster, Rust-based runtime, rebuilt from the ground up and available in two distributions. For most users, the right choice is [Fusion](/docs/fusion/about-fusion), which extends the open-source core with SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, instant feedback, and platform-connected workflows. For license-aware customers, we offer [dbt Core v2.0](/docs/local/install-dbt), a distribution that includes only Apache 2.0 open-source code. Both distributions share the same project language and DAG semantics, so once you upgrade to v2.0, your existing dbt project works with either distribution.
```

> v2.0 marks a new foundation for dbt: a faster, Rust-based runtime, rebuilt from the ground up and available in two distributions. For most users, the right choice is [Fusion](/docs/fusion/about-fusion), which extends the open-source core with SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, instant feedback, and platform-connected workflows. For license-aware customers, we offer [dbt Core v2.0](/docs/local/install-dbt), a distribution that includes only Apache 2.0 open-source code. Both distributions share the same project language and DAG semantics, so once you upgrade to v2.0, your existing dbt project works with either distribution.

Reviewer 3: Can we break this dense paragraph up?
```suggestion
v2.0 marks a new foundation for dbt: a faster, Rust-based runtime, rebuilt from the ground up and available in two distributions. For most users, the right choice is [Fusion](/docs/fusion/about-fusion), which extends the open-source core with SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, instant feedback, and platform-connected workflows. 

For license-aware customers, we offer [dbt Core v2.0](/docs/local/install-dbt), a distribution that includes only Apache 2.0 open-source code. Both distributions share the same project language and DAG semantics, so once you upgrade to v2.0, your existing dbt project works with either distribution.
```

| Distribution | Install | License | What you get |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Fusion** | [Multiple installation options](/docs/local/install-dbt?version=2.0) | Proprietary | dbt Core v2.0 foundation plus Fusion features: SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, and more. |
| **dbt Core v2.0** | `pip install dbt-core` | Apache 2.0 | Open-source Rust-based runtime. Faster parsing and execution. |

## Installation

For most users, the recommended path is to install Fusion as it includes all of dbt Core v2.0 plus the robust Fusion feature set.

### Fusion

> Install the [<Constant name="fusion" /> release candidate](/docs/local/install-dbt?version=2.0) today.

Reviewer: Why are we not listing the commands to install fusion here?

But then we are listing the commands to install Core in the next section?

Reviewer 2: ++

Author: @graciegoheen @eliasdefaria We link to the robust Fusion docs that also include VS Code extension information in the same place. We've built a dedicated page for this. As Core v2 is in alpha, we've not moved any of that content over to the main pages and have it only in the upgrade guide for the time being. As it matures and catches up to Fusion, we'll put everything in a single spot, but we don't traditionally include alpha content in the main docs pages, only beta or higher

### dbt Core v2.0

> If you specifically need the open-source distribution of v2, you must target an explicit pin during the alpha. You can copy the following commands to install the alpha and immediately update to the most recent version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you specifically need the open-source distribution of v2, install dbt Core. During alpha, you must target an explicit pin. You can copy the following commands to install the alpha and immediately update to the most recent version:
```

```shell
pip install dbt-core==2.0.0-alpha.1
dbt system update
```

## What to know before upgrading

> We are taking this opportunity to _strengthen the framework_ by removing deprecated functionality, rationalizing confusing behavior, and providing more rigorous validation on erroneous inputs. This means that there is some work involved in preparing an existing dbt project for v2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new major version is an opportunity to _strengthen the framework_ by removing deprecated functionality, rationalizing confusing behavior, and providing more rigorous validation on erroneous inputs. This means that there is some work involved in preparing an existing dbt project for v2.
```

> That work is documented below — it should be simple, straightforward, and in many cases, auto-fixable with the [`dbt-autofix`](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix) helper or the [Fusion upgrade agent skill](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills/tree/main/skills/dbt-migration/skills/migrating-dbt-core-to-fusion).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That work is documented below — it should be simple, straightforward, and in many cases, auto-fixable with the [`dbt-autofix`](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix) helper or the [agent skill](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills/tree/main/skills/dbt-migration/skills/migrating-dbt-core-to-fusion).
```

agent skill is not exclusive to fusion - it works for upgrading to v2

| Distribution | Install | License | What you get |
|---|---|---|---|

> | **Fusion** | [Multiple installation options](/docs/local/install-dbt?version=2.0) | Proprietary | dbt Core v2.0 foundation plus Fusion features: SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, and more. |

Reviewer: What do you mean by "multiple installation options"?

Author: @graciegoheen CDN, pip, brew, and winget are what we have documented

Reviewer: Are these only supported for Fusion? Or are these supported for all of v2 (rust)?

Reviewer 2: I believe OSS v2 is also brew and pip, just not CDN nor winget

| **dbt Core v2.0** | `pip install dbt-core` | Apache 2.0 | Open-source Rust-based runtime. Faster parsing and execution. |

## Installation

For most users, the recommended path is to install Fusion as it includes all of dbt Core v2.0 plus the robust Fusion feature set.

### Fusion

Install the [<Constant name="fusion" /> release candidate](/docs/local/install-dbt?version=2.0) today.

### dbt Core v2.0

> If you specifically need the open-source distribution, you must target an explicit pin. You can copy the following commands to install the alpha and immediately update to the most recent version:

Reviewer: targeting an explicit pin is just because we're in alpha right now.

if you specifically need the open source distribution, you should install `dbt-core`

Author: Will be more explicit

> If you specifically need the open-source distribution, you must target an explicit pin. You can copy the following commands to install the alpha and immediately update to the most recent version:

Author: ```suggestion
If you specifically need the open-source distribution of v2, you must target an explicit pin during the alpha. You can copy the following commands to install the alpha and immediately update to the most recent version:
```

```shell
pip install dbt-core==2.0.0-alpha.1
dbt system update
```

## What to know before upgrading

> dbt v1 and v2 share a common language spec — the code in your project. dbt Labs is committed to providing feature parity with v1 wherever possible.

Reviewer: For the initial release, but future additions to the dbt framework will go into v2. I would cut these sentences, I'm not sure that they make sense.

At the same time, we want to take this opportunity to _strengthen the framework_ by removing deprecated functionality, rationalizing confusing behavior, and providing more rigorous validation on erroneous inputs. This means that there is some work involved in preparing an existing dbt project for v2.

> That work is documented below — it should be simple, straightforward, and in many cases, auto-fixable with the [`dbt-autofix`](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix) helper or the dbt Copilot agent skill.

Reviewer: can we link to the agent skill - also, I think you can use it with any AI agent (not exclusive to dbt copilot) 

https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills/tree/main/skills/dbt-migration/skills/migrating-dbt-core-to-fusion

> That work is documented below — it should be simple, straightforward, and in many cases, auto-fixable with the [`dbt-autofix`](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix) helper or the dbt Copilot agent skill.

Author: ```suggestion
That work is documented below — it should be simple, straightforward, and in many cases, auto-fixable with the [`dbt-autofix`](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix) helper or the [Fusion upgrade agent skill](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-agent-skills/tree/main/skills/dbt-migration/skills/migrating-dbt-core-to-fusion).
```

| Distribution | Install | License | What you get |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Fusion** | pip, brew, winget, CDN — [see all options](/docs/local/install-dbt?version=2.0) | Proprietary | dbt Core v2.0 foundation plus Fusion features: SQL comprehension, column-level lineage, and more. |

> | **dbt Core v2.0** | pip, brew | Apache 2.0 | Open-source Rust-based runtime. Faster parsing and execution. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| **dbt Core v2.0** | pip, brew | Apache 2.0 | Open-source Rust-based runtime: Faster parsing and execution. |
```

## Installation

For most users, the recommended path is to install Fusion as it includes all of dbt Core v2.0 plus the robust Fusion feature set.

### Fusion

Install Fusion using pip, or see all [installation options](/docs/local/install-dbt?version=2.0) (brew, winget, CDN):

```shell
pip install dbt
```

### dbt Core v2.0

If you specifically need the open-source distribution of v2, install dbt Core. During alpha, you must target an explicit pin. You can copy the following commands to install the alpha and immediately update to the most recent version:

```shell

> pip install dbt-core==2.0.0-alpha.1

Author: @eliasdefaria assuming they'll need to target the specific version for brew installations as well, correct?

Reviewer 2: No I believe brew is standalone, no pinned version for core

### Supported adapters

The following adapters are supported in v2.0:

<FusionAdapters />

### A clean slate

> dbt Labs is committed to moving forward with v2, and it will not support any deprecated functionality (see the [Changes overview](/reference/changes-overview) for details):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
v2 will not support any deprecated functionality (see the [Changes overview](/reference/changes-overview) for details):
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "committed to moving forward with v2" meant

### Supported adapters

The following adapters are supported in v2.0:

<FusionAdapters />

### A clean slate

dbt Labs is committed to moving forward with v2, and it will not support any deprecated functionality (see the [Changes overview](/reference/changes-overview) for details):
- All [deprecation warnings](/reference/deprecations) must be resolved before upgrading to the new engine. This includes historic deprecations and [new ones as of dbt Core v1.10](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade/upgrading-to-v1.10#deprecation-warnings).

> - All [behavior change flags](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behaviors) will be removed (generally enabled). You can no longer opt out of them using `flags:` in your `dbt_project.yml`.

Reviewer: this is not true - only some are removed

> - All [behavior change flags](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behaviors) will be removed (generally enabled). You can no longer opt out of them using `flags:` in your `dbt_project.yml`.

Author: ```suggestion
- Some [behavior change flags](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behaviors) will be removed (generally enabled). You can no longer opt out of them using `flags:` in your `dbt_project.yml`.
```

> ### dbt State <Lifecycle status="preview" />

Reviewer: Should we remove this callout from the upgrade guide? dbt State is not exclusive to v2 - you can also get it in earlier versions of core or in the platform

Reviewer 2: ++

To enable dbt State locally, run [`dbt login`](/reference/commands/login#dbt-login-with-dbt-state) from your CLI. It opens a browser window to sign in to your <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> account or create a free one, then automatically writes `manage_state: true` to [`~/.dbt/user_settings.yml`](/reference/global-configs/user-settings) &mdash; enabling dbt State on every `dbt run` or `dbt build` for you. 

To enable dbt State for everyone on your project, add [`manage_state: true`](/reference/global-configs/about-global-configs) to the `flags:` block in `dbt_project.yml`. You can also enable or disable dbt State per run using [CLI flags](/reference/global-configs/about-global-configs): `--manage-state` or `--no-manage-state`, or set the `DBT_ENGINE_MANAGE_STATE=1` environment variable. For more information, refer to [About dbt State](/docs/deploy/dbt-state-about) and [Setting up dbt State](/docs/deploy/dbt-state-setup).

> ### Changed functionality

Reviewer: @eliasdefaria how do we want to handle callouts for "new" functionality (thinking things like `login`, linter, etc.). Should we have separate "core" & "fusion" guides for that? Have everything listed here?

Reviewer 2: I think we keep everything in one place. I think we want them treated like the same thing in all honesty. Like VS Code

> :::info What are "deprecated flags"?

Reviewer 3: This is out of scope, but this doesn't need to be a callout. It fits nicely in this section

The following deprecated flags require updates in your job definitions or scripts:

- **`--models` / `--model` / `-m`:** Use `--select` / `-s` instead (renamed in dbt Core v0.21). dbt raises an error in v2 if you use the old flags. Do not pass `--models` as the value to `-s` (for example, `dbt run -s --models`); v1 treated that as a model name, but v2 requires a valid selector.

- **`--resource-type` / `--exclude-resource-type`:** Use `--resource-types` / `--exclude-resource-types`. For more information, see [Resource type flags](/reference/global-configs/resource-type).

<FusionPartialParseCliFlags />

#### Conflicting package versions when a local package depends on a hub package which the root package also wants will error

> If a local package depends on a hub package that the root package also wants, `dbt deps` doesn't resolve conflicting versions in <Constant name="core_v1" />; it will install whatever the root project requests.

Reviewer 3: a variable! nice!

In dbt Core v1, `dbt clean` deletes:
- Any files outside the project directory if `clean-targets` is configured with an absolute path or relative path containing `../`, though there is an opt-in config to disable this (`--clean-project-files-only` / `--no-clean-project-files-only`).
- Any files in the `asset-paths` or `doc-paths` (even though other resource paths, like `model-paths` and `seed-paths`, are restricted).

In v2, `dbt clean` will not delete any files in configured resource paths or files outside the project directory.

#### All unit tests are run first in `dbt build`

In dbt Core v1, the direct parents of the model being unit tested needed to exist in the warehouse to retrieve the needed column name and type information. `dbt build` runs the unit tests (and their dependent models) _in lineage order_.

In v2, `dbt build` runs _all_ of the unit tests _first_, and then builds the rest of the DAG, due to built-in column name and type awareness.

#### Configuring `--threads`

<Constant name="core_v1" /> runs with `--threads 1` by default. You can increase this number to run more nodes in parallel on the remote data platform, up to the max parallelism enabled by the DAG.

> Version 2 handles threading differently depending on your data platform:

Reviewer 3: Above we use v2 is there a reason we're spelling out "version" here?

> You can no longer interoperate with pre-1.8 versions of dbt-core if you're a:

Reviewer 2: You can no longer? This section doesn't make sense. What are we saying here? If you are a customer upgrading you can't interoperate in what way?

- Hybrid customer running Fusion and an old (pre-v1.8) version of dbt Core
- Customer upgrading from an old (pre-v1.8) version of dbt Core to v2

> Fusion cannot interoperate with the old manifest, which powers features like deferral for `state:modified` comparison.

Reviewer 2: This isn't true. Fusion can ingest v12 manifest produced by dbt Core. I would not include it

{% endmacro %}
```

This is no longer supported in v2 and will return an error: 

```bash

> error: dbt1501: Failed to add template invalid operation: return() is called in a non-block context

Reviewer 2: This is actually a warning now. Example:

>[warning] [JinjaTopLevelReturn (dbt1508)]: return is not at the top level of the block.
Its value is final and cannot be modified by surrounding expressions.
Example: return(0) + 1. The + 1 is ignored and the macro returns 0.
